Diabetes is a chronic, metabolic disease characterised by elevated blood sugar levels, which leads over time to damage to the organs. The incidence of diabetes has rapidly risen in association with the global rise in obesity, sedentary lifestyles, consumption of ultra-processed foods, and rapidly ageing populations. It is estimated that there are 537 million individuals living with diabetes as of 2021. As a population health researcher, I’m deeply interested in understanding the risk factors associated with diabetes, in hopes of making a small contribution towards humanity’s efforts in ridding us of this disease.

The aim of this project was to develop train and evaluate several machine learning models and ensembles of models to optimise accuracy and area under the receiver operating characteristic curve (AUC). For this project, we considered the following models: general linear model (GLM), k-nearest neighbours (KNN), locally estimated scatterplot smoothing (LOESS), recursive partitioning and regression trees (rpart), random forest (RF), extreme gradient boosting (XGB), and naive Bayes (NB). We also constructed several ensemble models using a voting approach. We found the humble GLM model to be most effective in predicting diabetes status with accuracy and AUC scores
of 0.805, and 0.773 respectively. For this project, we worked with a small dataset, with relatively few number of predictors. Nonetheless, the same basic principles can apply with more complex datasets. Further optimisations can also be obtained with other techniques, such as feature engineering and oversampling.
